Title: Tidy data is good data
Date: 2014-02-12 22:26
Category: Class Core
Tags: R, class, admin, GitHub, data
Slug: tidydata
Author: Christopher Grainger
Summary: It's time to start really working with data.

I hope everyone was able to follow along today reasonably well. We're really starting to pick up pace now, and if you want to be proficient in R, we can't slow down. As I said in class, I want to introduce you to ways of thinking that might be a little outside of your comfort zone, but which will get you a bit closer to thinking like a data scientist.

One of the best things you can do, and what I would like you to do for homework, is read the ['Tidy Data'](http://vita.had.co.nz/papers/tidy-data.pdf) paper by Hadley Wickham. Hadley is one of the most prominent programmers in the R language, and his work is so integral to the day-to-day work of so many R users that his packages (like dplyr, reshape2, and ggplot2) are collectively known as the 'Hadleyverse.'

I would like you to go ahead and try to do as much as you can of the project that we started in class today. Remember that you will need to set up git on your computer (instructions are in the previous post). You will then need to sign up to GitHub, follow me, fork the repository, open a version control project in RStudio, and save, commit, and push your work. I can then check on it.

This is a great opportunity for you guys to start getting your hands dirty and break past any inhibitions you have about Googling and experimenting. I don't expect you to know how to do everything in the homework yet, but you will need to be resourceful enough with the skills you have already gained to figure it out. You have a basic grasp of how R works. Searches like 'merging data in R' will return rich explanations on websites like [Stack Overflow](http://stackoverflow.com/questions/tagged/r). I have linked to a number of good resources in the Resources page above. 

I strongly recommend that if you have any questions you ask them in the comments section of this post. Don't be discouraged if I respond with tips on how to find the answer yourself. This is part of programming and I have to reiterate that it is the only way to really learn. Programmers never really 'know' everything by heart. You learn phrases and idioms, you learn intuition, but very often you will need to refer back to old code or check the documentation or just Google for how to do something. I use Google constantly in almost every project I work on.

Remember that we don't have class next week as it is reading week. I will put up another post to comment on progress with the homework and to guide you to some more resources. When we return (26/2), we'll finish up our coverage of basic data prep and start looking at visualisation.[^fn-1]

[^fn-1]: If you want to have a look ahead, start looking at ggplot2 (part of the 'Hadleyverse' and one of the most important packages in R). I really recommend the ['Graphs' section of Cookbook for R](http://www.cookbook-r.com/Graphs/) as a starting point for ggplot2. 